Chapter Three

CURRENT
ELECTRICITY

3.1 INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 1, all charges whether free or bound, were considered to be at
rest. Charges in motion constitute an electric current. Such currents occur
naturally in many situations. Lightning is one such phenomenon in
which charges flow from the clouds to the earth through the atmosphere,
sometimes with disastrous results. The flow of charges in lightning is not
steady, but in our everyday life we see many devices where charges flow
in a steady manner, like water flowing smoothly in a river. A torch and a
cell-driven clock are examples of such devices. In the present chapter, we
shall study some of the basic laws concerning steady electric currents.

3.2 ELECTRIC CURRENT
Imagine a small area held normal to the direction of flow of charges. Both
the positive and the negative charges may flow forward and backward
across the area. In a given time interval t, let q+ be the net amount (i.e.,
forward minus backward) of positive charge that flows in the forward
direction across the area. Similarly, let q – be the net amount of negative
charge flowing across the area in the forward direction. The net amount
of charge flowing across the area in the forward direction in the time
interval t, then, is q = q+– q –. This is proportional to t for steady current

2024-25

Physics
and the quotient
I=

q
t

(3.1)

is defined to be the current across the area in the forward direction. (If it
turn out to be a negative number, it implies a current in the backward
direction.)
Currents are not always steady and hence more generally, we define
the current as follows. Let DQ be the net charge flowing across a crosssection of a conductor during the time interval Dt [i.e., between times t
and (t + Dt)]. Then, the current at time t across the cross-section of the
conductor is defined as the value of the ratio of DQ to Dt in the limit of Dt
tending to zero,
∆Q
(3.2)
∆t
In SI units, the unit of current is ampere. An ampere is defined
through magnetic effects of currents that we will study in the following
chapter. An ampere is typically the order of magnitude of currents in
domestic appliances. An average lightning carries currents of the order
of tens of thousands of amperes and at the other extreme, currents in
our nerves are in microamperes.
I (t ) ≡ lim

∆t → 0

3.3 ELECTRIC CURRENTS IN CONDUCTORS

82

An electric charge will experience a force if an electric field is applied. If it is
free to move, it will thus move contributing to a current. In nature, free
charged particles do exist like in upper strata of atmosphere called the
ionosphere. However, in atoms and molecules, the negatively charged
electrons and the positively charged nuclei are bound to each other and
are thus not free to move. Bulk matter is made up of many molecules, a
gram of water, for example, contains approximately 1022 molecules. These
molecules are so closely packed that the electrons are no longer attached
to individual nuclei. In some materials, the electrons will still be bound,
i.e., they will not accelerate even if an electric field is applied. In other
materials, notably metals, some of the electrons are practically free to move
within the bulk material. These materials, generally called conductors,
develop electric currents in them when an electric field is applied.
If we consider solid conductors, then of course the atoms are tightly
bound to each other so that the current is carried by the negatively
charged electrons. There are, however, other types of conductors like
electrolytic solutions where positive and negative charges both can move.
In our discussions, we will focus only on solid conductors so that the
current is carried by the negatively charged electrons in the background
of fixed positive ions.
Consider first the case when no electric field is present. The electrons
will be moving due to thermal motion during which they collide with the
fixed ions. An electron colliding with an ion emerges with the same speed
as before the collision. However, the direction of its velocity after the
collision is completely random. At a given time, there is no preferential
direction for the velocities of the electrons. Thus on the average, the

2024-25

Current
Electricity
number of electrons travelling in any direction will be equal to the number
of electrons travelling in the opposite direction. So, there will be no net
electric current.
Let us now see what happens to such a
piece of conductor if an electric field is applied.
To focus our thoughts, imagine the conductor
in the shape of a cylinder of radius R (Fig. 3.1).
Suppose we now take two thin circular discs FIGURE 3.1 Charges +Q and –Q put at the ends
of a dielectric of the same radius and put
of a metallic cylinder. The electrons will drift
positive charge +Q distributed over one disc
because of the electric field created to
and similarly –Q at the other disc. We attach
neutralise the charges. The current thus
will stop after a while unless the charges +Q
the two discs on the two flat surfaces of the
and –Q are continuously replenished.
cylinder. An electric field will be created and
is directed from the positive towards the
negative charge. The electrons will be accelerated due to this field towards
+Q. They will thus move to neutralise the charges. The electrons, as long
as they are moving, will constitute an electric current. Hence in the
situation considered, there will be a current for a very short while and no
current thereafter.
We can also imagine a mechanism where the ends of the cylinder are
supplied with fresh charges to make up for any charges neutralised by
electrons moving inside the conductor. In that case, there will be a steady
electric field in the body of the conductor. This will result in a continuous
current rather than a current for a short period of time. Mechanisms,
which maintain a steady electric field are cells or batteries that we shall
study later in this chapter. In the next sections, we shall study the steady
current that results from a steady electric field in conductors.

3.4 OHM’S LAW
A basic law regarding flow of currents was discovered by G.S. Ohm in
1828, long before the physical mechanism responsible for flow of currents
was discovered. Imagine a conductor through which a current I is flowing
and let V be the potential difference between the ends of the conductor.
Then Ohm’s law states that
VµI
or, V = R I

(3.3)

where the constant of proportionality R is called the resistance of the
conductor. The SI units of resistance is ohm, and is denoted by the symbol
W. The resistance R not only depends on the material of the conductor
but also on the dimensions of the conductor. The dependence of R on the
dimensions of the conductor can easily be determined as follows.
Consider a conductor satisfying Eq. (3.3) to be in the form of a slab of
length l and cross sectional area A [Fig. 3.2(a)]. Imagine placing two such
identical slabs side by side [Fig. 3.2(b)], so that the length of the
combination is 2l. The current flowing through the combination is the
same as that flowing through either of the slabs. If V is the potential
difference across the ends of the first slab, then V is also the potential
difference across the ends of the second slab since the second slab is

2024-25

FIGURE 3.2
Illustrating the
relation R = rl/A for
a rectangular slab
of length l and area
of cross-section A.

83

GEORG SIMON OHM (1787–1854)

Physics
identical to the first and the same current I flows through
both. The potential difference across the ends of the
combination is clearly sum of the potential difference
across the two individual slabs and hence equals 2V. The
current through the combination is I and the resistance
of the combination RC is [from Eq. (3.3)],
2V
=2R
(3.4)
I
since V/I = R, the resistance of either of the slabs. Thus,
doubling the length of a conductor doubles the
resistance. In general, then resistance is proportional to
length,
RC =

Georg Simon Ohm (1787–
1854) German physicist,
professor at Munich. Ohm
was led to his law by an
analogy
between
the
conduction of heat: the
electric field is analogous to
the temperature gradient,
and the electric current is
analogous to the heat flow.

(3.5)
R ∝l
Next, imagine dividing the slab into two by cutting it
lengthwise so that the slab can be considered as a
combination of two identical slabs of length l , but each
having a cross sectional area of A/2 [Fig. 3.2(c)].
For a given voltage V across the slab, if I is the current
through the entire slab, then clearly the current flowing
through each of the two half-slabs is I/2. Since the
potential difference across the ends of the half-slabs is V,
i.e., the same as across the full slab, the resistance of each
of the half-slabs R1 is

V
V
= 2 = 2R.
(3.6)
( I /2)
I
Thus, halving the area of the cross-section of a conductor doubles
the resistance. In general, then the resistance R is inversely proportional
to the cross-sectional area,
R1 =

1
A
Combining Eqs. (3.5) and (3.7), we have
R ∝

l
A
and hence for a given conductor
R ∝

(3.7)

(3.8)

l
(3.9)
A
where the constant of proportionality r depends on the material of the
conductor but not on its dimensions. r is called resistivity.
Using the last equation, Ohm’s law reads
R=ρ

I ρl
(3.10)
A
Current per unit area (taken normal to the current), I/A, is called
current density and is denoted by j. The SI units of the current density
are A/m2. Further, if E is the magnitude of uniform electric field in the
conductor whose length is l, then the potential difference V across its
ends is El. Using these, the last equation reads
V =I ×R=

84

2024-25

Current
Electricity
El=jrl
or, E = j r
(3.11)
The above relation for magnitudes E and j can indeed be cast in a
vector form. The current density, (which we have defined as the current
through unit area normal to the current) is also directed along E, and is
º j E/E). Thus, the last equation can be written as,
also a vector j (º
(3.12)
E = jr
or, j = s E

(3.13)

where s º1/r is called the conductivity. Ohm’s law is often stated in an
equivalent form, Eq. (3.13) in addition to Eq.(3.3). In the next section, we
will try to understand the origin of the Ohm’s law as arising from the
characteristics of the drift of electrons.

3.5 DRIFT OF ELECTRONS AND THE ORIGIN
OF RESISTIVITY
As remarked before, an electron will suffer collisions with the heavy fixed
ions, but after collision, it will emerge with the same speed but in random
directions. If we consider all the electrons, their average velocity will be
zero since their directions are random. Thus, if there are N electrons and
the velocity of the ith electron (i = 1, 2, 3, ... N ) at a given time is vi , then

1 N
∑ vi = 0
N i =1

(3.14)

Consider now the situation when an electric field is
present. Electrons will be accelerated due to this
field by
–e E
(3.15)
m
where –e is the charge and m is the mass of an electron.
Consider again the ith electron at a given time t. This
electron would have had its last collision some time
before t, and let ti be the time elapsed after its last
collision. If vi was its velocity immediately after the last
collision, then its velocity Vi at time t is
a =

Vi = vi +

−eE
ti
m

(3.16)

since starting with its last collision it was accelerated
(Fig. 3.3) with an acceleration given by Eq. (3.15) for a
time interval ti . The average velocity of the electrons at
time t is the average of all the Vi’s. The average of vi’s is
zero [Eq. (3.14)] since immediately after any collision,
the direction of the velocity of an electron is completely
random. The collisions of the electrons do not occur at
regular intervals but at random times. Let us denote by
t, the average time between successive collisions. Then
at a given time, some of the electrons would have spent

2024-25

FIGURE 3.3 A schematic picture of
an electron moving from a point A to
another point B through repeated
collisions, and straight line travel
between collisions (full lines). If an
electric field is applied as shown, the
electron ends up at point B¢ (dotted
lines). A slight drift in a direction
opposite the electric field is visible.

85

Physics
time more than t and some less than t. In other words, the time ti in
Eq. (3.16) will be less than t for some and more than t for others as we go
through the values of i = 1, 2 ..... N. The average value of ti then is t
(known as relaxation time). Thus, averaging Eq. (3.16) over the
N-electrons at any given time t gives us for the average velocity vd
v d ≡ ( Vi )average = ( vi )average −

eE
(t i )average
m

eE
eE
τ =−
τ
(3.17)
m
m
This last result is surprising. It tells us that the
electrons move with an average velocity which is
independent of time, although electrons are
accelerated. This is the phenomenon of drift and the
velocity vd in Eq. (3.17) is called the drift velocity.
Because of the drift, there will be net transport of
charges across any area perpendicular to E. Consider
a planar area A, located inside the conductor such that
the normal to the area is parallel to E (Fig. 3.4). Then
FIGURE 3.4 Current in a metallic
because of the drift, in an infinitesimal amount of time
conductor. The magnitude of current
density in a metal is the magnitude of
Dt, all electrons to the left of the area at distances upto
charge contained in a cylinder of unit
|vd|Dt would have crossed the area. If n is the number
area and length vd.
of free electrons per unit volume in the metal, then
there are n Dt |vd|A such electrons. Since each
electron carries a charge –e, the total charge transported across this area
A to the right in time Dt is –ne A|vd|Dt. E is directed towards the left and
hence the total charge transported along E across the area is negative of
this. The amount of charge crossing the area A in time Dt is by definition
[Eq. (3.2)] I Dt, where I is the magnitude of the current. Hence,
=0–

I ∆t = + n e A v d ∆t

(3.18)

Substituting the value of |vd| from Eq. (3.17)
I ∆t =

e2A
τ n ∆t E
m

(3.19)

By definition I is related to the magnitude |j| of the current density by
I = |j|A

(3.20)

Hence, from Eqs.(3.19) and (3.20),
j=

ne 2
τE
m

(3.21)

The vector j is parallel to E and hence we can write Eq. (3.21) in the
vector form
j=

86

ne 2
τE
m

(3.22)

Comparison with Eq. (3.13) shows that Eq. (3.22) is exactly the Ohm’s
law, if we identify the conductivity s as

2024-25

Current
Electricity
ne 2
τ
(3.23)
m
We thus see that a very simple picture of electrical conduction
reproduces Ohm’s law. We have, of course, made assumptions that t
and n are constants, independent of E. We shall, in the next section,
discuss the limitations of Ohm’s law.

σ =

Example 3.1 (a) Estimate the average drift speed of conduction
electrons in a copper wire of cross-sectional area 1.0 × 10–7 m2 carrying
a current of 1.5 A. Assume that each copper atom contributes roughly
one conduction electron. The density of copper is 9.0 × 103 kg/m3,
and its atomic mass is 63.5 u. (b) Compare the drift speed obtained
above with, (i) thermal speeds of copper atoms at ordinary
temperatures, (ii) speed of propagation of electric field along the
conductor which causes the drift motion.
Solution
(a) The direction of drift velocity of conduction electrons is opposite
to the electric field direction, i.e., electrons drift in the direction
of increasing potential. The drift speed vd is given by Eq. (3.18)
vd = (I/neA)
Now, e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, A = 1.0 × 10–7m2, I = 1.5 A. The density of
conduction electrons, n is equal to the number of atoms per cubic
metre (assuming one conduction electron per Cu atom as is
reasonable from its valence electron count of one). A cubic metre
of copper has a mass of 9.0 × 103 kg. Since 6.0 × 1023 copper
atoms have a mass of 63.5 g,
n=

6.0 × 1023
× 9.0 × 106
63.5

= 8.5 × 1028 m–3
which gives,
vd =

1.5
8.5 × 1028 × 1.6 × 10 –19 × 1.0 × 10 –7

= 1.1 × 10–3 m s–1 = 1.1 mm s–1
(b) (i) At a temperature T, the thermal speed* of a copper atom of
mass M is obtained from [<(1/2) Mv2 > = (3/2) kBT ] and is thus

* See Eq. (12.23) of Chapter 12 from Class XI book.

2024-25

EXAMPLE 3.1

typically of the order of k B T/M , where k B is the Boltzmann
constant. For copper at 300 K, this is about 2 × 102 m/s. This
figure indicates the random vibrational speeds of copper atoms
in a conductor. Note that the drift speed of electrons is much
smaller, about 10–5 times the typical thermal speed at ordinary
temperatures.
(ii) An electric field travelling along the conductor has a speed of
an electromagnetic wave, namely equal to 3.0 × 10 8 m s –1
(You will learn about this in Chapter 8). The drift speed is, in
comparison, extremely small; smaller by a factor of 10–11.

87

Physics
Example 3.2

EXAMPLE 3.2

(a) In Example 3.1, the electron drift speed is estimated to be only a
few mm s–1 for currents in the range of a few amperes? How then
is current established almost the instant a circuit is closed?
(b) The electron drift arises due to the force experienced by electrons
in the electric field inside the conductor. But force should cause
acceleration. Why then do the electrons acquire a steady average
drift speed?
(c) If the electron drift speed is so small, and the electron’s charge is
small, how can we still obtain large amounts of current in a
conductor?
(d) When electrons drift in a metal from lower to higher potential,
does it mean that all the ‘free’ electrons of the metal are moving
in the same direction?
(e) Are the paths of electrons straight lines between successive
collisions (with the positive ions of the metal) in the (i) absence of
electric field, (ii) presence of electric field?
Solution
(a) Electric field is established throughout the circuit, almost instantly
(with the speed of light) causing at every point a local electron
drift. Establishment of a current does not have to wait for electrons
from one end of the conductor travelling to the other end. However,
it does take a little while for the current to reach its steady value.
(b) Each ‘free’ electron does accelerate, increasing its drift speed until
it collides with a positive ion of the metal. It loses its drift speed
after collision but starts to accelerate and increases its drift speed
again only to suffer a collision again and so on. On the average,
therefore, electrons acquire only a drift speed.
(c) Simple, because the electron number density is enormous,
~1029 m–3.
(d) By no means. The drift velocity is superposed over the large
random velocities of electrons.
(e) In the absence of electric field, the paths are straight lines; in the
presence of electric field, the paths are, in general, curved.

3.5.1 Mobility
As we have seen, conductivity arises from mobile charge carriers. In
metals, these mobile charge carriers are electrons; in an ionised gas, they
are electrons and positive charged ions; in an electrolyte, these can be
both positive and negative ions.
An important quantity is the mobility m defined as the magnitude of
the drift velocity per unit electric field:

µ=

| vd |
E

(3.24)

The SI unit of mobility is m2/Vs and is 104 of the mobility in practical
units (cm2/Vs). Mobility is positive. From Eq. (3.17), we have

88

vd =

e τE
m

2024-25

Current
Electricity
Hence,
vd e τ
=
E m
where t is the average collision time for electrons.

µ=

(3.25)

3.6 LIMITATIONS OF OHM’S LAW
Although Ohm’s law has been found valid over a large class
of materials, there do exist materials and devices used in
electric circuits where the proportionality of V and I does not
hold. The deviations broadly are one or more of the following
FIGURE 3.5 The dashed line
types:
represents the linear Ohm’s
(a) V ceases to be proportional to I (Fig. 3.5).
law. The solid line is the voltage
(b) The relation between V and I depends on the sign of V. In
V versus current I for a good
other words, if I is the current for a certain V, then reversing
conductor.
the direction of V keeping its magnitude fixed, does not
produce a current of the same magnitude as I in the opposite direction
(Fig. 3.6). This happens, for example, in a diode which we will study
in Chapter 14.

FIGURE 3.6 Characteristic curve
of a diode. Note the different
scales for negative and positive
values of the voltage and current.

FIGURE 3.7 Variation of current
versus voltage for GaAs.

(c) The relation between V and I is not unique, i.e., there is more than
one value of V for the same current I (Fig. 3.7). A material exhibiting
such behaviour is GaAs.
Materials and devices not obeying Ohm’s law in the form of Eq. (3.3)
are actually widely used in electronic circuits. In this and a few
subsequent chapters, however, we will study the electrical currents in
materials that obey Ohm’s law.

3.7 RESISTIVITY OF VARIOUS MATERIALS
The materials are classified as conductors, semiconductors and insulators
depending on their resistivities, in an increasing order of their values.

2024-25

89

Physics
Metals have low resistivities in the range of 10–8 Wm to 10–6 Wm. At the
other end are insulators like ceramic, rubber and plastics having
resistivities 1018 times greater than metals or more. In between the two
are the semiconductors. These, however, have resistivities
characteristically decreasing with a rise in temperature. The resistivities
of semiconductors can be decreased by adding small amount of suitable
impurities. This last feature is exploited in use of semiconductors for
electronic devices.

3.8 TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RESISTIVITY
The resistivity of a material is found to be dependent on the temperature.
Different materials do not exhibit the same dependence on temperatures.
Over a limited range of temperatures, that is not too large, the resistivity
of a metallic conductor is approximately given by,

rT = r0 [1 + a (T–T0)]
(3.26)
where rT is the resistivity at a temperature T and r0 is the same at a
reference temperature T0. a is called the temperature co-efficient of
resistivity, and from Eq. (3.26), the dimension of a is (Temperature)–1.
For metals, a is positive.
The relation of Eq. (3.26) implies that a graph of rT plotted against T
would be a straight line. At temperatures much lower than 0°C, the graph,
however, deviates considerably from a straight line (Fig. 3.8).
Equation (3.26) thus, can be used approximately over a limited range
of T around any reference temperature T0, where the graph can be
approximated as a straight line.



FIGURE 3.8
Resistivity rT of
copper as a function
of temperature T.

90

FIGURE 3.9 Resistivity
rT of nichrome as a
function of absolute
temperature T.

FIGURE 3.10
Temperature dependence
of resistivity for a typical
semiconductor.

Some materials like Nichrome (which is an alloy of nickel, iron and
chromium) exhibit a very weak dependence of resistivity with temperature
(Fig. 3.9). Manganin and constantan have similar properties. These
materials are thus widely used in wire bound standard resistors since
their resistance values would change very little with temperatures.

2024-25

Current
Electricity
Unlike metals, the resistivities of semiconductors decrease with
increasing temperatures. A typical dependence is shown in Fig. 3.10.
We can qualitatively understand the temperature dependence of
resistivity, in the light of our derivation of Eq. (3.23). From this equation,
resistivity of a material is given by
ρ=

1

σ

=

m
n e 2τ

(3.27)

r thus depends inversely both on the number n of free electrons per unit
volume and on the average time t between collisions. As we increase
temperature, average speed of the electrons, which act as the carriers of
current, increases resulting in more frequent collisions. The average time
of collisions t, thus decreases with temperature.
In a metal, n is not dependent on temperature to any appreciable
extent and thus the decrease in the value of t with rise in temperature
causes r to increase as we have observed.
For insulators and semiconductors, however, n increases with
temperature. This increase more than compensates any decrease in t in
Eq.(3.23) so that for such materials, r decreases with temperature.
Example 3.3 An electric toaster uses nichrome for its heating
element. When a negligibly small current passes through it, its
resistance at room temperature (27.0 °C) is found to be 75.3 W. When
the toaster is connected to a 230 V supply, the current settles, after
a few seconds, to a steady value of 2.68 A. What is the steady
temperature of the nichrome element? The temperature coefficient
of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range
involved, is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.
Solution When the current through the element is very small, heating
effects can be ignored and the temperature T1 of the element is the
same as room temperature. When the toaster is connected to the
supply, its initial current will be slightly higher than its steady value
of 2.68 A. But due to heating effect of the current, the temperature
will rise. This will cause an increase in resistance and a slight
decrease in current. In a few seconds, a steady state will be reached
when temperature will rise no further, and both the resistance of the
element and the current drawn will achieve steady values. The
resistance R2 at the steady temperature T2 is
R2 =

230 V
= 8 5 .8 Ω
2 .6 8 A

Using the relation
R2 = R1 [1 + a (T2 – T1)]
with a = 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1, we get
(85.8 – 75.3)
(75.3) × 1.70 × 10 –4

= 820 °C

that is, T2 = (820 + 27.0) °C = 847 °C
Thus, the steady temperature of the heating element (when heating
effect due to the current equals heat loss to the surroundings) is
847 °C.

2024-25

EXAMPLE 3.3

T2 – T1 =

91

Physics
Example 3.4 The resistance of the platinum wire of a platinum
resistance thermometer at the ice point is 5 W and at steam point is
5.23 W. When the thermometer is inserted in a hot bath, the resistance
of the platinum wire is 5.795 W. Calculate the temperature of the
bath.
Solution R0 = 5 W, R100 = 5.23 W and Rt = 5.795 W

EXAMPLE 3.4

Now,

t =

Rt − R0
× 100,
R100 − R0

Rt = R0 (1 + α t )

=

5.795 − 5
× 100
5.23 − 5

=

0.795
× 100 = 345.65 °C
0.23

3.9 ELECTRICAL ENERGY, POWER
Consider a conductor with end points A and B, in which a current I is
flowing from A to B. The electric potential at A and B are denoted by V (A)
and V (B) respectively. Since current is flowing from A to B, V (A) > V (B)
and the potential difference across AB is V = V(A) – V(B) > 0.
In a time interval Dt, an amount of charge DQ = I Dt travels from A to
B. The potential energy of the charge at A, by definition, was Q V (A) and
similarly at B, it is Q V(B). Thus, change in its potential energy DUpot is
DUpot = Final potential energy – Initial potential energy
= DQ[(V (B) – V (A)] = –DQ V
= –I VDt < 0
(3.28)
If charges moved without collisions through the conductor, their
kinetic energy would also change so that the total energy is unchanged.
Conservation of total energy would then imply that,
DK = –DUpot

(3.29)

that is,
DK = I VDt > 0

(3.30)

Thus, in case charges were moving freely through the conductor under
the action of electric field, their kinetic energy would increase as they
move. We have, however, seen earlier that on the average, charge carriers
do not move with acceleration but with a steady drift velocity. This is
because of the collisions with ions and atoms during transit. During
collisions, the energy gained by the charges thus is shared with the atoms.
The atoms vibrate more vigorously, i.e., the conductor heats up. Thus,
in an actual conductor, an amount of energy dissipated as heat in the
conductor during the time interval Dt is,
DW = I VDt
(3.31)
The energy dissipated per unit time is the power dissipated
P = DW/Dt and we have,

92

P=IV

(3.32)

2024-25

Current
Electricity
Using Ohm’s law V = IR, we get
P = I 2 R = V 2/R

(3.33)

as the power loss (“ohmic loss”) in a conductor of resistance R carrying a
current I. It is this power which heats up, for example, the coil of an
electric bulb to incandescence, radiating out heat and light.
Where does the power come from? As we have
reasoned before, we need an external source to keep
a steady current through the conductor. It is clearly
this source which must supply this power. In the
simple circuit shown with a cell (Fig.3.11), it is the
chemical energy of the cell which supplies this power
for as long as it can.
The expressions for power, Eqs. (3.32) and (3.33),
show the dependence of the power dissipated in a
resistor R on the current through it and the voltage
FIGURE 3.11 Heat is produced in the
across it.
resistor R which is connected across
Equation (3.33) has an important application to
the terminals of a cell. The energy
dissipated in the resistor R comes from
power transmission. Electrical power is transmitted
the chemical energy of the electrolyte.
from power stations to homes and factories, which
may be hundreds of miles away, via transmission
cables. One obviously wants to minimise the power
loss in the transmission cables connecting the power stations to homes
and factories. We shall see now how this can be achieved. Consider a
device R, to which a power P is to be delivered via transmission cables
having a resistance Rc to be dissipated by it finally. If V is the voltage
across R and I the current through it, then
P=VI
(3.34)
The connecting wires from the power station to the device has a finite
resistance Rc. The power dissipated in the connecting wires, which is
wasted is Pc with
Pc = I 2 Rc
P 2 Rc
(3.35)
V2
from Eq. (3.32). Thus, to drive a device of power P, the power wasted in the
connecting wires is inversely proportional to V 2. The transmission cables
from power stations are hundreds of miles long and their resistance Rc is
considerable. To reduce Pc, these wires carry current at enormous values
of V and this is the reason for the high voltage danger signs on transmission
lines — a common sight as we move away from populated areas. Using
electricity at such voltages is not safe and hence at the other end, a device
called a transformer lowers the voltage to a value suitable for use.
=

3.10 CELLS, EMF, INTERNAL RESISTANCE
We have already mentioned that a simple device to maintain a steady
current in an electric circuit is the electrolytic cell. Basically a cell has
two electrodes, called the positive (P) and the negative (N), as shown in

2024-25

93

Physics
Fig. 3.12. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in
the solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte.
The positive electrode has a potential difference V+ (V+ > 0) between
itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked
A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative
potential – (V– ) (V– ≥ 0) relative to the electrolyte adjacent to it,
marked as B in the figure. When there is no current, the electrolyte
has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference
between P and N is V+ – (–V–) = V+ + V– . This difference is called the
electromotive force (emf) of the cell and is denoted by e. Thus
e = V++V– > 0
(3.36)
Note that e is, actually, a potential difference and not a force. The
name emf, however, is used because of historical reasons, and was
given at a time when the phenomenon was not understood properly.
To understand the significance of e, consider a resistor R
connected across the cell (Fig. 3.12). A current I flows across R
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Sketch of from C to D. As explained before, a steady current is maintained
because current flows from N to P through the electrolyte. Clearly,
an electrolyte cell with
positive terminal P and
across the electrolyte the same current flows through the electrolyte
negative terminal N. The
but from N to P, whereas through R, it flows from P to N.
gap between the electrodes
The electrolyte through which a current flows has a finite
is exaggerated for clarity. A resistance r, called the internal resistance. Consider first the
and B are points in the
situation when R is infinite so that I = V/R = 0, where V is the
electrolyte typically close to
potential difference between P and N. Now,
P and N. (b) the symbol for
V = Potential difference between P and A
a cell, + referring to P and
+ Potential difference between A and B
– referring to the N
+ Potential difference between B and N
electrode. Electrical
=e
(3.37)
connections to the cell are
made at P and N.
Thus, emf e is the potential difference between the positive and
negative electrodes in an open circuit, i.e., when no current is
flowing through the cell.
If however R is finite, I is not zero. In that case the potential difference
between P and N is
V = V++ V– – I r
=e–Ir

(3.38)

Note the negative sign in the expression (I r ) for the potential difference
between A and B. This is because the current I flows from B to A in the
electrolyte.
In practical calculations, internal resistances of cells in the circuit
may be neglected when the current I is such that e >> I r. The actual
values of the internal resistances of cells vary from cell to cell. The internal
resistance of dry cells, however, is much higher than the common
electrolytic cells.
We also observe that since V is the potential difference across R, we
have from Ohm’s law
V=I R
(3.39)

94

Combining Eqs. (3.38) and (3.39), we get

2024-25

Current
Electricity
I R = e–I r

ε
(3.40)
R +r
The maximum current that can be drawn from a cell is for R = 0 and
it is Imax = e/r. However, in most cells the maximum allowed current is
much lower than this to prevent permanent damage to the cell.
Or, I =

3.11 CELLS IN SERIES AND IN PARALLEL
Like resistors, cells can be combined together in an electric circuit. And
like resistors, one can, for calculating currents and voltages in a circuit,
replace a combination of cells by an equivalent cell.

FIGURE 3.13 Two cells of emf’s e1 and e2 in the series. r1, r2 are their
internal resistances. For connections across A and C, the combination
can be considered as one cell of emf eeq and an internal resistance req.

Consider first two cells in series (Fig. 3.13), where one terminal of the
two cells is joined together leaving the other terminal in either cell free.
e1, e2 are the emf’s of the two cells and r1, r2 their internal resistances,
respectively.
Let V (A), V (B), V (C) be the potentials at points A, B and C shown in
Fig. 3.13. Then V (A) – V (B) is the potential difference between the positive
and negative terminals of the first cell. We have already calculated it in
Eq. (3.38) and hence,
V AB ≡ V ( A ) V (B) = ε1

I r1

(3.41)

I r2

(3.42)

Similarly,
VBC ≡ V (B) V (C) = ε 2

Hence, the potential difference between the terminals A and C of the
combination is
V AC ≡ V (A) – V (C) = V ( A ) – V ( B ) + V ( B ) – V (C )

= (ε1 + ε 2 ) – I (r1 + r2 )

(3.43)

If we wish to replace the combination by a single cell between A and
C of emf eeq and internal resistance req, we would have
VAC = eeq– I req
Comparing the last two equations, we get

(3.44)

eeq = e1 + e2

(3.45)

and req = r1 + r2
(3.46)
In Fig.3.13, we had connected the negative electrode of the first to the
positive electrode of the second. If instead we connect the two negatives,

2024-25

95

Physics
Eq. (3.42) would change to VBC = –e2–Ir2 and we will get

eeq = e1 – e2
(e1 > e2)
(3.47)
The rule for series combination clearly can be extended to any number
of cells:
(i) The equivalent emf of a series combination of n cells is just the sum of
their individual emf’s, and
(ii) The equivalent internal resistance of a series combination of n cells is
just the sum of their internal resistances.
This is so, when the current leaves each cell from the positive
electrode. If in the combination, the current leaves any cell from
the negative electrode, the emf of the cell enters the expression
for eeq with a negative sign, as in Eq. (3.47).
Next, consider a parallel combination of the cells (Fig. 3.14).
I1 and I2 are the currents leaving the positive electrodes of the
cells. At the point B1, I1 and I2 flow in whereas the current I flows
out. Since as much charge flows in as out, we have
(3.48)
I = I1 + I2
FIGURE 3.14 Two cells in
parallel. For connections
Let V (B1) and V (B2) be the potentials at B1 and B2, respectively.
across A and C, the
Then, considering the first cell, the potential difference across its
combination can be
terminals is V (B1) – V (B2). Hence, from Eq. (3.38)

replaced by one cell of emf
eeq and internal resistances
req whose values are given in
Eqs. (3.54) and (3.55).

V ≡ V ( B1 ) – V ( B2 ) = ε1 – I1r1

(3.49)

Points B1 and B2 are connected exactly similarly to the second
cell. Hence considering the second cell, we also have

V ≡ V ( B1 ) – V ( B2 ) = ε 2 – I 2r2

(3.50)

Combining the last three equations
I = I1 + I 2
1 1
ε – V ε 2 – V  ε1 ε 2 
= 1
+
= +  –V  + 
r1
r2
 r1 r2 
 r1 r2 

(3.51)

Hence, V is given by,

V =

ε1r2 + ε 2r1
r1 + r2

–I

r1r2
r1 + r2

(3.52)

If we want to replace the combination by a single cell, between B1 and
B2, of emf eeq and internal resistance req, we would have
V = eeq – I req
(3.53)
The last two equations should be the same and hence

ε eq =
req =

ε1r2 + ε 2r1

(3.54)

r1 + r2

r1r2
r1 + r2

(3.55)

We can put these equations in a simpler way,

96

2024-25

Current
Electricity
1 1 1
= +
req r1 r2

ε eq

ε1
r1

+

ε2
r2

(3.57)

In Fig. (3.14), we had joined the positive terminals
together and similarly the two negative ones, so that the
currents I1, I2 flow out of positive terminals. If the negative
terminal of the second is connected to positive terminal
of the first, Eqs. (3.56) and (3.57) would still be valid with
e 2 ® –e2
Equations (3.56) and (3.57) can be extended easily.
If there are n cells of emf e1, . . . en and of internal
resistances r1,... rn respectively, connected in parallel, the
combination is equivalent to a single cell of emf eeq and
internal resistance req, such that

1 1
1
= + ... +
req r1
rn

εeq
req

=

ε1
ε
+ ... + n
r1
rn

(3.58)

(3.59)

3.12 KIRCHHOFF’S RULES

Gustav Robert Kirchhoff
(1824 – 1887) German
physicist, professor at
Heidelberg
and
at
Berlin. Mainly known for
his development of
spectroscopy, he also
made many important
contributions to mathematical physics, among
them, his first and
second rules for circuits.

GUSTAV ROBERT KIRCHHOFF (1824 –

req

=

(3.56)

Electric circuits generally consist of a number of resistors
and cells interconnected sometimes in a complicated way.
The formulae we have derived earlier for series and parallel combinations
of resistors are not always sufficient to determine all the currents and
potential differences in the circuit. Two rules, called Kirchhoff’s rules,
are very useful for analysis of electric circuits.
Given a circuit, we start by labelling currents in each resistor by a
symbol, say I, and a directed arrow to indicate that a current I flows
along the resistor in the direction indicated. If ultimately I is determined
to be positive, the actual current in the resistor is in the direction of the
arrow. If I turns out to be negative, the current actually flows in a direction
opposite to the arrow. Similarly, for each source (i.e., cell or some other
source of electrical power) the positive and negative electrodes are labelled,
as well as, a directed arrow with a symbol for the current flowing through
the cell. This will tell us the potential difference, V = V (P) – V (N) = e – I r
[Eq. (3.38) between the positive terminal P and the negative terminal N; I
here is the current flowing from N to P through the cell]. If, while labelling
the current I through the cell one goes from P to N, then of course
V=e+Ir
(3.60)
(a)

Having clarified labelling, we now state the rules and the proof:
Junction rule: At any junction, the sum of the currents entering
the junction is equal to the sum of currents leaving the junction
(Fig. 3.15).

2024-25

97

Physics

FIGURE 3.15 At junction a the current
leaving is I1 + I2 and current entering is I3.
The junction rule says I3 = I1 + I2. At point
h current entering is I1. There is only one
current leaving h and by junction rule
that will also be I1. For the loops ‘ahdcba’
and ‘ahdefga’, the loop rules give –30I1 –
41 I3 + 45 = 0 and –30I1 + 21 I2 – 80 = 0.

This applies equally well if instead of a junction of
several lines, we consider a point in a line.
The proof of this rule follows from the fact that
when currents are steady, there is no accumulation
of charges at any junction or at any point in a line.
Thus, the total current flowing in, (which is the rate
at which charge flows into the junction), must equal
the total current flowing out.
(b)
Loop rule: The algebraic sum of changes in
potential around any closed loop involving
resistors and cells in the loop is zero
(Fig. 3.15).
This rule is also obvious, since electric potential is
dependent on the location of the point. Thus
starting with any point if we come back to the same
point, the total change must be zero. In a closed
loop, we do come back to the starting point and
hence the rule.

Example 3.5 A battery of 10 V and negligible internal resistance is
connected across the diagonally opposite corners of a cubical network
consisting of 12 resistors each of resistance 1 W (Fig. 3.16). Determine
the equivalent resistance of the network and the current along each
edge of the cube.

98

EXAMPLE 3.5

Z

FIGURE 3.16

2024-25

Current
Electricity
Solution The network is not reducible to a simple series and parallel
combinations of resistors. There is, however, a clear symmetry in the
problem which we can exploit to obtain the equivalent resistance of
the network.
The paths AA¢, AD and AB are obviously symmetrically placed in the
network. Thus, the current in each must be the same, say, I. Further,
at the corners A¢, B and D, the incoming current I must split equally
into the two outgoing branches. In this manner, the current in all
the 12 edges of the cube are easily written down in terms of I, using
Kirchhoff’s first rule and the symmetry in the problem.
Next take a closed loop, say, ABCC¢EA, and apply Kirchhoff’s second
rule:
–IR – (1/2)IR – IR + e = 0
where R is the resistance of each edge and e the emf of battery. Thus,
5
IR
2
The equivalent resistance Req of the network is

e=

Example 3.6 Determine the current in each branch of the network
shown in Fig. 3.17.

EXAMPLE 3.6

FIGURE 3.17

2024-25

Similation for application of Kirchhoff ’s rules:

EXAMPLE 3.5

It should be noted that because of the symmetry of the network, the
great power of Kirchhoff’s rules has not been very apparent in Example 3.5.
In a general network, there will be no such simplification due to symmetry,
and only by application of Kirchhoff’s rules to junctions and closed loops
(as many as necessary to solve the unknowns in the network) can we
handle the problem. This will be illustrated in Example 3.6.

http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/kirch3/

ε
5
= R
3I 6
For R = 1 W, Req = (5/6) W and for e = 10 V, the total current (= 3I ) in
the network is
3I = 10 V/(5/6) W = 12 A, i.e., I = 4 A
The current flowing in each edge can now be read off from the
Fig. 3.16.
Req =

99

Physics
Solution Each branch of the network is assigned an unknown current
to be determined by the application of Kirchhoff’s rules. To reduce
the number of unknowns at the outset, the first rule of Kirchhoff is
used at every junction to assign the unknown current in each branch.
We then have three unknowns I 1, I2 and I3 which can be found by
applying the second rule of Kirchhoff to three different closed loops.
Kirchhoff’s second rule for the closed loop ADCA gives,
10 – 4(I1– I2) + 2(I2 + I3 – I1) – I1 = 0
[3.61(a)]
that is, 7I1– 6I2 – 2I3 = 10
For the closed loop ABCA, we get
10 – 4I2– 2 (I2 + I3) – I1 = 0
that is, I1 + 6I2 + 2I3 =10
[3.61(b)]
For the closed loop BCDEB, we get
5 – 2 (I2 + I3 ) – 2 (I2 + I3 – I1) = 0
that is, 2I1 – 4I2 – 4I3 = –5
[3.61(c)]
Equations (3.61 a, b, c) are three simultaneous equations in three
unknowns. These can be solved by the usual method to give
5
7
A, I3 = 1
A
8
8
The currents in the various branches of the network are
1
5
7
AB :
A, CA : 2 A, DEB : 1
A
2
8
8
1
7
AD : 1 A, CD : 0 A, BC : 2 A
2
8
It is easily verified that Kirchhoff’s second rule applied to the
remaining closed loops does not provide any additional independent
equation, that is, the above values of currents satisfy the second
rule for every closed loop of the network. For example, the total voltage
drop over the closed loop BADEB

EXAMPLE 3.6

I1 = 2.5A, I2 =

5

15

5 V+  × 4 V− 
× 4 V
8

 8

equal to zero, as required by Kirchhoff’s second rule.

3.13 WHEATSTONE BRIDGE

100

As an application of Kirchhoff’s rules consider the circuit shown in
Fig. 3.18, which is called the Wheatstone bridge. The bridge has
four resistors R1, R2, R3 and R4. Across one pair of diagonally opposite
points (A and C in the figure) a source is connected. This (i.e., AC) is
called the battery arm. Between the other two vertices, B and D, a
galvanometer G (which is a device to detect currents) is connected. This
line, shown as BD in the figure, is called the galvanometer arm.
For simplicity, we assume that the cell has no internal resistance. In
general there will be currents flowing across all the resistors as well as a
current Ig through G. Of special interest, is the case of a balanced bridge
where the resistors are such that Ig = 0. We can easily get the balance
condition, such that there is no current through G. In this case, the
Kirchhoff’s junction rule applied to junctions D and B (see the figure)

2024-25

Current
Electricity
immediately gives us the relations I1 = I3 and I2 = I4. Next, we apply
Kirchhoff’s loop rule to closed loops ADBA and CBDC. The first
loop gives
–I1 R1 + 0 + I2 R2 = 0

(Ig = 0)

(3.62)

and the second loop gives, upon using I3 = I1, I4 = I2
I2 R4 + 0 – I1 R3 = 0

(3.63)

From Eq. (3.62), we obtain,
I1 R2
=
I 2 R1
whereas from Eq. (3.63), we obtain,
I1 R4
=
I 2 R3
Hence, we obtain the condition
R2
R
= 4
[3.64(a)]
R1
R3
This last equation relating the four resistors is called the balance
condition for the galvanometer to give zero or null deflection.
The Wheatstone bridge and its balance condition provide a practical
method for determination of an unknown resistance. Let us suppose we
have an unknown resistance, which we insert in the fourth arm; R4 is
thus not known. Keeping known resistances R1 and R2 in the first and
second arm of the bridge, we go on varying R3 till the galvanometer shows
a null deflection. The bridge then is balanced, and from the balance
condition the value of the unknown resistance R4 is given by,
R
R4 = R3 2
[3.64(b)]
R1
A practical device using this principle is called the meter bridge.

FIGURE 3.18

Example 3.7 The four arms of a Wheatstone bridge (Fig. 3.19) have
the following resistances:
AB = 100W, BC = 10W, CD = 5W, and DA = 60W.

EXAMPLE 3.7

FIGURE 3.19

2024-25

101

Physics
A galvanometer of 15W resistance is connected across BD. Calculate
the current through the galvanometer when a potential difference of
10 V is maintained across AC.
Solution Considering the mesh BADB, we have
100I1 + 15Ig – 60I2 = 0
or

20I1 + 3Ig – 12I2= 0

[3.65(a)]

Considering the mesh BCDB, we have
10 (I1 – Ig) – 15Ig – 5 (I2 + Ig ) = 0
10I1 – 30Ig –5I2 = 0
2I1 – 6Ig – I2 = 0

[3.65(b)]

Considering the mesh ADCEA,
60I2 + 5 (I2 + Ig ) = 10
65I2 + 5Ig = 10
13I2 + Ig = 2

[3.65(c)]

Multiplying Eq. (3.65b) by 10
20I1 – 60Ig – 10I2 = 0

[3.65(d)]

From Eqs. (3.65d) and (3.65a) we have
63Ig – 2I2 = 0

EXAMPLE 3.7

I2 = 31.5Ig

[3.65(e)]

Substituting the value of I2 into Eq. [3.65(c)], we get
13 (31.5Ig ) + Ig = 2
410.5 Ig = 2
Ig = 4.87 mA.

SUMMARY
1.
2.

3.

Current through a given area of a conductor is the net charge passing
per unit time through the area.
To maintain a steady current, we must have a closed circuit in which
an external agency moves electric charge from lower to higher potential
energy. The work done per unit charge by the source in taking the
charge from lower to higher potential energy (i.e., from one terminal
of the source to the other) is called the electromotive force, or emf, of
the source. Note that the emf is not a force; it is the voltage difference
between the two terminals of a source in open circuit.
Ohm’s law: The electric current I flowing through a substance is
proportional to the voltage V across its ends, i.e., V µ I or V = RI,
where R is called the resistance of the substance. The unit of resistance
is ohm: 1W = 1 V A–1.

102

2024-25

Current
Electricity
4.

The resistance R of a conductor depends on its length l and
cross-sectional area A through the relation,

R=

5.

6.

7.

ρl

A
where r, called resistivity is a property of the material and depends on
temperature and pressure.
Electrical resistivity of substances varies over a very wide range. Metals
have low resistivity, in the range of 10–8 W m to 10–6 W m. Insulators
like glass and rubber have 1022 to 1024 times greater resistivity.
Semiconductors like Si and Ge lie roughly in the middle range of
resistivity on a logarithmic scale.
In most substances, the carriers of current are electrons; in some
cases, for example, ionic crystals and electrolytic liquids, positive and
negative ions carry the electric current.
Current density j gives the amount of charge flowing per second per
unit area normal to the flow,
j = nq vd

8.

where n is the number density (number per unit volume) of charge
carriers each of charge q, and vd is the drift velocity of the charge
carriers. For electrons q = – e. If j is normal to a cross-sectional area
A and is constant over the area, the magnitude of the current I through
the area is nevd A.
Using E = V/l, I = nevd A, and Ohm’s law, one obtains

eE
ne 2
=ρ
vd
m
m
The proportionality between the force eE on the electrons in a metal
due to the external field E and the drift velocity vd (not acceleration)
can be understood, if we assume that the electrons suffer collisions
with ions in the metal, which deflect them randomly. If such collisions
occur on an average at a time interval t,
vd = at = eEt/m
where a is the acceleration of the electron. This gives
m
ne 2τ
9. In the temperature range in which resistivity increases linearly with
temperature, the temperature coefficient of resistivity a is defined as
the fractional increase in resistivity per unit increase in temperature.
10. Ohm’s law is obeyed by many substances, but it is not a fundamental
law of nature. It fails if
(a) V depends on I non-linearly.
(b) the relation between V and I depends on the sign of V for the same
absolute value of V.
(c) The relation between V and I is non-unique.
An example of (a) is when r increases with I (even if temperature is
kept fixed). A rectifier combines features (a) and (b). GaAs shows the
feature (c).
11. When a source of emf e is connected to an external resistance R, the
voltage Vext across R is given by

ρ=

ε

R
R +r
where r is the internal resistance of the source.

Vext = IR =

2024-25

103

Physics
12. Kirchhoff’s Rules –
(a) Junction Rule: At any junction of circuit elements, the sum of
currents entering the junction must equal the sum of currents
leaving it.
(b) Loop Rule: The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any
closed loop must be zero.
13. The Wheatstone bridge is an arrangement of four resistances – R1, R2,
R3, R4 as shown in the text. The null-point condition is given by

R1 R3
=
R2 R 4
using which the value of one resistance can be determined, knowing
the other three resistances.

Physical Quantity

Symbol

Electric current

Dimensions

Unit

Remark
SI base unit

I

[A]

A

Charge

Q, q

[T A]

C

Voltage, Electric
potential difference

V

[M L T A ]

–1

V

Work/charge

Electromotive force

e

[M L2 T –3 A–1]

V

Work/charge

2

–3

2

–3

–2

Resistance

R

[M L T A ]

W

R = V/I

Resistivity

r

[M L3 T –3 A–2]
–1

Wm

R = rl/A

–3

3

2

S

s = 1/r

–3

A ]

Vm

Electrical
conductivity

s

[M

L T A]

Electric field

E

[M L T

Drift speed

vd

[L T ]

Relaxation time

t

[T]

Current density

j

[L–2 A]

Mobility

m

[M L T A ]

–1

–1

Electric force
charge

–1

vd =

–1

ms

eEτ
m

s

3

A m–2
–4

–1

2

–1

m V s

current/area
–1

vd / E

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

104

Current is a scalar although we represent current with an arrow.
Currents do not obey the law of vector addition. That current is a
scalar also follows from it’s definition. The current I through an area
of cross-section is given by the scalar product of two vectors:
I = j . DS
where j and DS are vectors.

2024-25

Current
Electricity
2.

3.

4.

5.

Refer to V-I curves of a resistor and a diode as drawn in the text. A
resistor obeys Ohm’s law while a diode does not. The assertion that
V = IR is a statement of Ohm’s law is not true. This equation defines
resistance and it may be applied to all conducting devices whether
they obey Ohm’s law or not. The Ohm’s law asserts that the plot of I
versus V is linear i.e., R is independent of V.
Equation E = ρ j leads to another statement of Ohm’s law, i.e., a
conducting material obeys Ohm’s law when the resistivity of the
material does not depend on the magnitude and direction of applied
electric field.
Homogeneous conductors like silver or semiconductors like pure
germanium or germanium containing impurities obey Ohm’s law within
some range of electric field values. If the field becomes too strong,
there are departures from Ohm’s law in all cases.
Motion of conduction electrons in electric field E is the sum of (i)
motion due to random collisions and (ii) that due to E. The motion
due to random collisions averages to zero and does not contribute to
vd (Chapter 10, Textbook of Class XI). vd , thus is only due to applied
electric field on the electron.
The relation j = ρ v should be applied to each type of charge carriers
separately. In a conducting wire, the total current and charge density
arises from both positive and negative charges:
j = ρ+ v+ + ρ– v–

ρ = ρ+ + ρ–
Now in a neutral wire carrying electric current,
ρ + = – ρ–
Further, v+ ~ 0 which gives
ρ=0
j = ρ– v

6.

Thus, the relation j = ρ v does not apply to the total current charge
density.
Kirchhoff’s junction rule is based on conservation of charge and the
outgoing currents add up and are equal to incoming current at a
junction. Bending or reorienting the wire does not change the validity
of Kirchhoff’s junction rule.

EXERCISES
3.1

3.2

3.3

The storage battery of a car has an emf of 12 V. If the internal
resistance of the battery is 0.4 Ω, what is the maximum current
that can be drawn from the battery?
A battery of emf 10 V and internal resistance 3 Ω is connected to a
resistor. If the current in the circuit is 0.5 A, what is the resistance
of the resistor? What is the terminal voltage of the battery when the
circuit is closed?
At room temperature (27.0 °C) the resistance of a heating element
is 100 Ω. What is the temperature of the element if the resistance is
found to be 117 Ω, given that the temperature coefficient of the
material of the resistor is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.

2024-25

105

Physics
3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

A negligibly small current is passed through a wire of length 15 m
and uniform cross-section 6.0 × 10 –7 m 2, and its resistance is
measured to be 5.0 W. What is the resistivity of the material at the
temperature of the experiment?
A silver wire has a resistance of 2.1 W at 27.5 °C, and a resistance
of 2.7 W at 100 °C. Determine the temperature coefficient of
resistivity of silver.
A heating element using nichrome connected to a 230 V supply
draws an initial current of 3.2 A which settles after a few seconds to
a steady value of 2.8 A. What is the steady temperature of the heating
element if the room temperature is 27.0 °C? Temperature coefficient
of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range
involved is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.
Determine the current in each branch of the network shown in
Fig. 3.20:

FIGURE 3.20

3.8

3.9

A storage battery of emf 8.0 V and internal resistance 0.5 W is being
charged by a 120 V dc supply using a series resistor of 15.5 W. What
is the terminal voltage of the battery during charging? What is the
purpose of having a series resistor in the charging circuit?
The number density of free electrons in a copper conductor
estimated in Example 3.1 is 8.5 × 1028 m–3. How long does an electron
take to drift from one end of a wire 3.0 m long to its other end? The
area of cross-section of the wire is 2.0 × 10–6 m2 and it is carrying a
current of 3.0 A.

106

2024-25

